docs: add release notes (#3682)
scalameta/metals: website/blog/2022-03-07-aluminium.md

---
author: Kamil Podsiadlo
title: Metals v0.11.2 - Aluminium
authorURL: https://twitter.com/podsiadel
authorImageURL: https://github.com/kpodsiad.png
---

We're happy to announce the release of Metals v0.11.2, which focuses on improving overall user experience.

<table>
<tbody>
  <tr>
    <td>Commits since last release</td>
    <td align="center">197</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Merged PRs</td>
    <td align="center">94</td>
  </tr>
    <tr>
    <td>Contributors</td>
    <td align="center">11</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Closed issues</td>

>     <td align="center"></td>

Reviewer: - [ ] Remember to fill this in

  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>New features</td>

>     <td align="center"></td>

Reviewer: - [ ] Remember to fill this in.

  </tr>
</tbody>

</table>

For full details: https://github.com/scalameta/metals/milestone/?closed=1

Metals is a language server for Scala that works with VS Code, Vim, Emacs,
Sublime Text and Eclipse. Metals is developed at the
[Scala Center](https://scala.epfl.ch/) and [VirtusLab](https://virtuslab.com)
with the help from [Lunatech](https://lunatech.com) along with contributors from
the community.

## TL;DR

Check out [https://scalameta.org/metals/](https://scalameta.org/metals/), and
give Metals a try!

- Reduce indexing time in monorepos on MacOS
- Display build target info
- View source jar files as virtual docs
- Improve completions for Scala 3
- [Test Explorer] Detect and run single tests for JUnit4

## Reduce indexing time in monorepos on MacOS

> Thanks to changes made by [Duhemm](https://github.com/Duhemm), Metals on MacOS can now index monorepo workspace much more faster than before. After changes, we observed even **over 10 times faster** indexing time in the workspaces where only a few submodules are needed to be imported.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thanks to changes made by [Duhemm](https://github.com/Duhemm), Metals on MacOS can now index monorepo workspaces much faster than before. After changes, we observed at times **over 10 times faster** indexing times in the workspaces where only a few submodules needed to be imported.  
```

> Here are a few examples of indexing improvement.

Reviewer: Just a nit, but maybe add a note that these are not actual benchmarks of any kind, but more of rough estimations of improvements in a couple example repos. Not sure if that's over worrisome on my part of not. Take it or leave it.

Reviewer 2: Yeah, I would mention that these are just example times.

Before | After
---|---
\>10minutes | ~30seconds
~40seconds  | ~4s

> However, take into mind that indexing speedup heavily depends on your repository structure. The more imported modules which don't need to be imported, the greater speed improvement is.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, take into mind that indexing speedup heavily depends on your repository structure. The more imported modules which don't need to be imported, the greater the speed improvement is.
```

> If you are interested in details you can check related [pull request](https://github.com/scalameta/metals/pull/3665).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are interested in details you can check out the related [pull request](https://github.com/scalameta/metals/pull/3665).
```

## Display build target info

> Thanks to the [Arthurm1](https://github.com/Arthurm1) Metals are able to display all important information about modules.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thanks to the [Arthurm1](https://github.com/Arthurm1) Metals is now able to display all important information about modules.
```
Do you think we should use the word modules here? Maybe a bit pedantic but we typically use "build targets" since this can also show test targets etc which aren't really modules. wdyt?

Also do you think we should include which clients support these new features? I know VS Code and nvim-metals support this one for example, but some of the others are only VS Code.

This brand new feature gathers in one view information such as: 
- javac and scalac options
- dependent modules
- projects classpath
- and many more

> ![](https://i.imgur.com/XGyJEsl.gif)

Reviewer: For accessibility let's make sure to add alt text to all these images or gifs.

> ## View source jar files as virtual docs

Reviewer: Can we make it clear that this is only a change for VS Code and not other clients.

Author: Will adding`[vs code]` be enough? 
`[vs code] View source jar files as virtual docs`

Reviewer: yea that should be fine.

Previously, when the client wanted to browse files in source jars source, these files were extracted and saved in the `metals/readonly/dependencies` directory. With the help of [virtual documents](https://code.visualstudio.com/api/extension-guides/virtual-documents) Metals can show you dependencies in readonly files without unnecessary copying.
Thanks [Arthurm1](https://github.com/Arthurm1) for this feature!

Together with Metals tab, this feature could be used to browse through your dependencies' sources. Just run the `Metals: Reveal Active File in Side Bar` command and browse through both dependencies and source code seamlessly.

> ![](https://imgur.com/HsuW8Hn.gif)

Reviewer: - [ ] Missing alt text

## Improve completions for Scala 3

> todo

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Completion suggestions for different Scala keywords now work with most of the Scala 3 keywords. This includes for example `given` and `enum`, it should also work even if defining things in toplevel without a wrapping class or object. 

![keyword-completions](https://i.imgur.com/4BUxCDK.gif)
```

## [Test Explorer] Detect and run single tests for JUnit4

> We're actively working on improving Test Explorer and getting it better with each release.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We're actively working on improving the Test Explorer and getting it better with each release.
```

> From now on, Metals are able to run or debug single test in JUnit4.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From now on, Metals is able to run or debug single test in JUnit4.
```

> Currently, this feature **works only for Bloop build server**, but in the future release we're going to add support for sbt as well.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently, this feature **only works when using Bloop as your build server**, but in a future release there will be support added for sbt as well.
```

> ![](https://imgur.com/FbgSTGr.gif)

Reviewer: - [ ] Missing alt text

> 

Reviewer 2: We should also add miscellaneous section to put the minor user facing changes such as `Forward current env variables to bloopInstall`

## Contributors

Big thanks to everybody who contributed to this release or reported an issue!

```
$ git shortlog -sn --no-merges v0.11.1..v0.11.2
    37	Tomasz Godzik
    24	Vadim Chelyshov
    22	Scala Steward
    15	Arthur McGibbon
     8	Kamil Podsiadlo
     7	ckipp01

>      6	Kamil Podsiadło

Reviewer 2: I usually modify the list to remove duplicates and fix up names.

Author: I was thinking about that but after all, it is a result of `git shortlog -sn --no-merges v0.11.1..v0.11.2`. I'm not sure if we should modify it and provide command at the same time.

## Reduce indexing time in monorepos on MacOS

Thanks to changes made by [Duhemm](https://github.com/Duhemm), Metals on MacOS can now index monorepo workspaces much faster than before. After changes, we observed at times **over 10 times faster** indexing times in the workspaces where only a few submodules needed to be imported.

> Here are a few examples of indexing improvement. They are not actual benchmarks of any kind, but more of rough estimations of improvements in a couple example repos

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here are a few examples of indexing improvement. They are not actual benchmarks of any kind, but more of rough estimations of improvements in a couple of example repos.
```
